README.md, before:

# Blood draw anemia prevention with conservative phlebotomy

A living systematic review

**Clinical summary:** This meta-analysis suggests that conservative phlebotomy *pending* effective at reducing transufusions due to iatrogenic anemia. The heterogenteity as measured by I2 was '[pending](http://handbook.cochrane.org/chapter_9/9_5_2_identifying_and_measuring_heterogeneity.htm)' at xx%.

[Keep current with this topic](Keep-up.md)

**Methods overview:** This repository is an [openMetaAnalysis](https://openmetaanalysis.github.io/) that updates a previously published narrative review.(1) Newer studies included are listed in the references below. Rationale for newer trials excluded may be listed at the end of the references. 
* [Methods](http://openmetaanalysis.github.io/methods.html) for openMetaAnalysis
* [Evidence search](evidence-search.md) for this review

**Results:** Details of the studies included are in the:
* [Description of studies (PICO table)](../../tree/master/study-details/pico-table.md) (not available)
* [Risk of bias assessment](../../tree/master/study-details/risk-of-bias.md) (not available)
* [Forest plots](../../tree/master/forest-plots) ([source data](../../tree/master/data))
* [Meta-regressions](../../tree/master/metaregression) ([source data](../../tree/master/data))
* [Reconciliation of conclusions and trials included with prior meta-analyses](../../tree/master/reconcilation-tables) (not available)

The forest plot for the primary outcomes are below. Additional [forest plots](../../tree/master/forest-plots) of secondary analyses may be available. 

![Principle results for benefit](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/openMetaAnalysis/Blood-draw-anemia-prevention-with-conservative-phlebotomy/master/forest-plots/Outcome-Primary.png "Principle results for benefit]")

The meta-regression for the primary outcomes are below. Additional [meta-regressions](../../tree/master/metaregression) of secondary analyses may be available. 

![Principle results for benefit](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/openMetaAnalysis/Blood-draw-anemia-prevention-with-conservative-phlebotomy/master/metaregression/Outcome-Primary.png "Principle results for benefit]")

References:
----------------------------------
### Systematic review(s)
#### Most recent review(s) at time of last revision of this repository
1. Page C, Retter A, Wyncoll D. Blood conservation devices in critical care: a narrative review. Ann Intensive Care. 2013 May 28;3:14. doi: 10.1186/2110-5820-3-14. Review. PMID: [23714376](http://pubmed.gov/23714376).
2. Fowler RA, Berenson M. Blood conservation in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med. 2003 Dec;31(12 Suppl):S715-20. PMID: [14724470](http://pubmed.gov/14724470).

### Controlled study(s) that are more recent
1. Dolman HS, Evans K, Zimmerman LH, Lavery T, Baylor AE, Wilson RF, Tyburski JG. Impact of minimizing diagnostic blood loss in the critically ill. Surgery. 2015 Oct;158(4):1083-7; PMID: [26164619](http://pubmed.gov/26164619).
2. Riessen R, Behmenburg M, Blumenstock G, Guenon D, Enkel S, Schäfer R, Haap M.  A Simple "Blood-Saving Bundle" Reduces Diagnostic Blood Loss and the Transfusion Rate in Mechanically Ventilated Patients. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 30;10(9). PMID: [26421920](http://pubmed.gov/26421920).
3. Salisbury AC, Reid KJ, Alexander KP, Masoudi FA, Lai SM, Chan PS, Bach RG, Wang TY, Spertus JA, Kosiborod M.
Diagnostic blood loss from phlebotomy and hospital-acquired anemia during acute myocardial infarction. Arch Intern Med. 2011 Oct 10;171(18):1646-53. doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2011.361. PMID: [21824940](http://pubmed.gov/21824940).
4. Rezende E, Ferez MA, Silva Junior JM, Oliveira AM, Viana RA, Mendes CL, Toledo Dde O, Ribeiro Neto MC, Setoyama TA.
Closed system for blood sampling and transfusion in critically ill patients. Rev Bras Ter Intensiva. 2010 Mar;22(1):5-10. PMID: [25303693](http://pubmed.gov/25303693).
5. Mukhopadhyay A, Yip HS, Prabhuswamy D, Chan YH, Phua J, Lim TK, Leong P. The use of a blood conservation device to reduce red blood cell transfusion requirements: a before and after study. Crit Care. 2010;14(1):R7. doi: 10.1186/cc8859. PMID: [20105285](http://pubmed.gov/20105285).
6. Mahdy S, Khan EI, Attia M, O'Brien BP, Seigne P. Evaluation of a blood conservation strategy in the intensive care unit: a prospective, randomized study. Middle East J Anesthesiology. 2009 Jun;20(2):219-23. PMID: [19583069](http://pubmed.gov/19583069).
8. Harber CR, Sosnowski KJ, Hegde RM. Highly conservative phlebotomy in adult intensive care--a prospective randomized controlled trial. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2006 Aug;34(4):434-7. PMID: [16913337](http://pubmed.gov/16913337).
9. MacIsaac CM, Presneill JJ, Boyce CA, Byron KL, Cade JF. The influence of a blood conserving device on anemia in intensive care patients. Anesthesia Intensive Care. 2003 Dec;31(6):653-7. PMID: [14719427](http://pubmed.gov/14719427).
10. Thorpe S, Thomas AN. The use of a blood conservation pressure transducer system in critically ill patients. Anesthesia. 2000 Jan;55(1):27-31. PMID: [10594430](http://pubmed.gov/10594430).
11. Peruzzi WT, Parker MA, Lichtenthal PR, Cochran-Zull C, Toth B, Blake M. A clinical evaluation of a blood conservation device in medical intensive care unit patients. Crit Care Med. 1993 Apr;21(4):501-6. PMID: [8472567](http://pubmed.gov/8472567).

#### Newer controlled study(s) undergoing review
1. Gleason E, Grossman S, Campbell C. Minimizing diagnostic blood loss in critically ill patients. Am J Crit Care. 1992 Jul;1(1):85-90. PMID: [1307883](http://pubmed.gov/1307883).

#### New study(s) *excluded* 
1. Smoller BR, Kruskall MS. Phlebotomy for diagnostic laboratory tests in adults. Pattern of use and effect on transfusion requirements. N Engl J Med. 1986 May 8. PMID: [3702919](http://pubmed.gov/3702919).*Measure of variation not reported*
3. Chant C, Wilson G, Friedrich JO. Anemia, transfusion, and phlebotomy practices in critically ill patients with prolonged ICU length of stay: a cohort study. Crit Care. 2006;10(5):R140. PMID: [17002795](http://pubmed.gov/17002795). *No intervention*
7. Thavendiranathan P, Bagai A, Ebidia A, Detsky AS, Choudhry NK. Do blood tests cause anemia in hospitalized patients? The effect of diagnostic phlebotomy on hemoglobin and hematocrit levels. J Gen Intern Med. 2005 Jun. PMID: [15987327](http://pubmed.gov/15987327).
2. Wisser D, van Ackern K, Knoll E, Wisser H, Bertsch T. Blood loss from laboratory tests. Clin Chem. 2003 Oct;49(10):1651-5. PMID: [14500590](http://pubmed.gov/14500590).*Does not report hemogobin change or transfusions*
3. Corwin HL, Gettinger A, Pearl RG, Fink MP, Levy MM, Abraham E, MacIntyre NR, Shabot MM, Duh MS, Shapiro MJ.
The CRIT Study: Anemia and blood transfusion in the critically ill--current clinical practice in the United States. Crit Care Med. 2004 Jan;32(1):39-52. PMID: [14707558](http://pubmed.gov/14707558). *Large study, observational*
4. Alazia M, Colavolpe JC, Botti G, Corda N, Ramero C, François G.
[Blood loss from diagnostic laboratory tests performed in intensive care units. Preliminary study]. Ann Fr Anesth Reanim. 1996;15(7):1004-7. PMID: [9180974](http://pubmed.gov/9180974).*No intervention*
4. Silver MJ, Li YH, Gragg LA, Jubran F, Stoller JK. Reduction of blood loss from diagnostic sampling in critically ill patients using a blood-conserving arterial line system. Chest. 1993 Dec;104(6):1711-5.  PMID: [8252948](http://pubmed.gov/8252948)*Does not report hemogobin change or transfusions*
5. Tarpey J, Lawler PG. Iatrogenic anemia? A survey of venesection in patients in the intensive therapy unit. Anesthesia. 1990 May;45(5):396-8. PMID: [2356936](http://pubmed.gov/2356936).*No intervention*
7. Sanchez-Giron F, Alvarez-Mora F. Reduction of blood loss from laboratory testing in hospitalized adult patients using small-volume (pediatric) tubes. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2008 Dec;132(12):1916-9. doi: 10.1043/1543-2165-132.12.1916. PMID: [19061290](http://pubmed.gov/19061290).*intervension aiming at blood volume change*

-------------------------------
[Cite and use this content](https://github.com/openMetaAnalysis/openMetaAnalysis.github.io/blob/master/reusing.MD)  - [Edit this page](../../edit/master/README.md) - [History](../../commits/master/README.md)  - 
[Issues and comments](../../issues?q=is%3Aboth+is%3Aissue)

Commit message:

Added Mukhopadhyay, 2011 as important exclusion

README.md, after:

# Blood draw anemia prevention with conservative phlebotomy

A living systematic review

**Clinical summary:** This meta-analysis suggests that conservative phlebotomy *pending* effective at reducing transufusions due to iatrogenic anemia. The heterogenteity as measured by I2 was '[pending](http://handbook.cochrane.org/chapter_9/9_5_2_identifying_and_measuring_heterogeneity.htm)' at xx%.

[Keep current with this topic](Keep-up.md)

**Methods overview:** This repository is an [openMetaAnalysis](https://openmetaanalysis.github.io/) that updates a previously published narrative review.(1) Newer studies included are listed in the references below. Rationale for newer trials excluded may be listed at the end of the references. 
* [Methods](http://openmetaanalysis.github.io/methods.html) for openMetaAnalysis
* [Evidence search](evidence-search.md) for this review

**Results:** Details of the studies included are in the:
* [Description of studies (PICO table)](../../tree/master/study-details/pico-table.md) (not available)
* [Risk of bias assessment](../../tree/master/study-details/risk-of-bias.md) (not available)
* [Forest plots](../../tree/master/forest-plots) ([source data](../../tree/master/data))
* [Meta-regressions](../../tree/master/metaregression) ([source data](../../tree/master/data))
* [Reconciliation of conclusions and trials included with prior meta-analyses](../../tree/master/reconcilation-tables) (not available)

The forest plot for the primary outcomes are below. Additional [forest plots](../../tree/master/forest-plots) of secondary analyses may be available. 

![Principle results for benefit](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/openMetaAnalysis/Blood-draw-anemia-prevention-with-conservative-phlebotomy/master/forest-plots/Outcome-Primary.png "Principle results for benefit]")

The meta-regression for the primary outcomes are below. Additional [meta-regressions](../../tree/master/metaregression) of secondary analyses may be available. 

![Principle results for benefit](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/openMetaAnalysis/Blood-draw-anemia-prevention-with-conservative-phlebotomy/master/metaregression/Outcome-Primary.png "Principle results for benefit]")

References:
----------------------------------
### Systematic review(s)
#### Most recent review(s) at time of last revision of this repository
1. Page C, Retter A, Wyncoll D. Blood conservation devices in critical care: a narrative review. Ann Intensive Care. 2013 May 28;3:14. doi: 10.1186/2110-5820-3-14. Review. PMID: [23714376](http://pubmed.gov/23714376).
2. Fowler RA, Berenson M. Blood conservation in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med. 2003 Dec;31(12 Suppl):S715-20. PMID: [14724470](http://pubmed.gov/14724470).

### Controlled study(s) that are more recent
1. Dolman HS, Evans K, Zimmerman LH, Lavery T, Baylor AE, Wilson RF, Tyburski JG. Impact of minimizing diagnostic blood loss in the critically ill. Surgery. 2015 Oct;158(4):1083-7; PMID: [26164619](http://pubmed.gov/26164619).
2. Riessen R, Behmenburg M, Blumenstock G, Guenon D, Enkel S, Schäfer R, Haap M.  A Simple "Blood-Saving Bundle" Reduces Diagnostic Blood Loss and the Transfusion Rate in Mechanically Ventilated Patients. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 30;10(9). PMID: [26421920](http://pubmed.gov/26421920).
3. Salisbury AC, Reid KJ, Alexander KP, Masoudi FA, Lai SM, Chan PS, Bach RG, Wang TY, Spertus JA, Kosiborod M.
Diagnostic blood loss from phlebotomy and hospital-acquired anemia during acute myocardial infarction. Arch Intern Med. 2011 Oct 10;171(18):1646-53. doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2011.361. PMID: [21824940](http://pubmed.gov/21824940).
4. Rezende E, Ferez MA, Silva Junior JM, Oliveira AM, Viana RA, Mendes CL, Toledo Dde O, Ribeiro Neto MC, Setoyama TA.
Closed system for blood sampling and transfusion in critically ill patients. Rev Bras Ter Intensiva. 2010 Mar;22(1):5-10. PMID: [25303693](http://pubmed.gov/25303693).
5. Mukhopadhyay A, Yip HS, Prabhuswamy D, Chan YH, Phua J, Lim TK, Leong P. The use of a blood conservation device to reduce red blood cell transfusion requirements: a before and after study. Crit Care. 2010;14(1):R7. doi: 10.1186/cc8859. PMID: [20105285](http://pubmed.gov/20105285).
6. Mahdy S, Khan EI, Attia M, O'Brien BP, Seigne P. Evaluation of a blood conservation strategy in the intensive care unit: a prospective, randomized study. Middle East J Anesthesiology. 2009 Jun;20(2):219-23. PMID: [19583069](http://pubmed.gov/19583069).
8. Harber CR, Sosnowski KJ, Hegde RM. Highly conservative phlebotomy in adult intensive care--a prospective randomized controlled trial. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2006 Aug;34(4):434-7. PMID: [16913337](http://pubmed.gov/16913337).
9. MacIsaac CM, Presneill JJ, Boyce CA, Byron KL, Cade JF. The influence of a blood conserving device on anemia in intensive care patients. Anesthesia Intensive Care. 2003 Dec;31(6):653-7. PMID: [14719427](http://pubmed.gov/14719427).
10. Thorpe S, Thomas AN. The use of a blood conservation pressure transducer system in critically ill patients. Anesthesia. 2000 Jan;55(1):27-31. PMID: [10594430](http://pubmed.gov/10594430).
11. Peruzzi WT, Parker MA, Lichtenthal PR, Cochran-Zull C, Toth B, Blake M. A clinical evaluation of a blood conservation device in medical intensive care unit patients. Crit Care Med. 1993 Apr;21(4):501-6. PMID: [8472567](http://pubmed.gov/8472567).

#### Newer controlled study(s) undergoing review
1. Gleason E, Grossman S, Campbell C. Minimizing diagnostic blood loss in critically ill patients. Am J Crit Care. 1992 Jul;1(1):85-90. PMID: [1307883](http://pubmed.gov/1307883).

#### New study(s) *excluded*
1. Mukhopadhyay A, See KC, Chan YH, Yip HS, Phua J. Effect of a blood conservation device in patients with preserved admission haemoglobin in the intensive care unit. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2011 May;39(3):426-30. PMID: [21675062](http://pubmed.gov/21675062) *Subgroup of patients already included in Mukhopadhyay, 2010)*
2. Sanchez-Giron F, Alvarez-Mora F. Reduction of blood loss from laboratory testing in hospitalized adult patients using small-volume (pediatric) tubes. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2008 Dec;132(12):1916-9. doi: 10.1043/1543-2165-132.12.1916. PMID: [19061290](http://pubmed.gov/19061290).*intervension aiming at blood volume change*
3. Chant C, Wilson G, Friedrich JO. Anemia, transfusion, and phlebotomy practices in critically ill patients with prolonged ICU length of stay: a cohort study. Crit Care. 2006;10(5):R140. PMID: [17002795](http://pubmed.gov/17002795). *No intervention*
4. Thavendiranathan P, Bagai A, Ebidia A, Detsky AS, Choudhry NK. Do blood tests cause anemia in hospitalized patients? The effect of diagnostic phlebotomy on hemoglobin and hematocrit levels. J Gen Intern Med. 2005 Jun. PMID: [15987327](http://pubmed.gov/15987327).
5. Corwin HL, Gettinger A, Pearl RG, Fink MP, Levy MM, Abraham E, MacIntyre NR, Shabot MM, Duh MS, Shapiro MJ. The CRIT Study: Anemia and blood transfusion in the critically ill--current clinical practice in the United States. Crit Care Med. 2004 Jan;32(1):39-52. PMID: [14707558](http://pubmed.gov/14707558). *Large study, observational*
6. Wisser D, van Ackern K, Knoll E, Wisser H, Bertsch T. Blood loss from laboratory tests. Clin Chem. 2003 Oct;49(10):1651-5. PMID: [14500590](http://pubmed.gov/14500590).*Does not report hemogobin change or transfusions*
7. Alazia M, Colavolpe JC, Botti G, Corda N, Ramero C, François G. [Blood loss from diagnostic laboratory tests performed in intensive care units. Preliminary study]. Ann Fr Anesth Reanim. 1996;15(7):1004-7. PMID: [9180974](http://pubmed.gov/9180974).*No intervention*
8. Silver MJ, Li YH, Gragg LA, Jubran F, Stoller JK. Reduction of blood loss from diagnostic sampling in critically ill patients using a blood-conserving arterial line system. Chest. 1993 Dec;104(6):1711-5.  PMID: [8252948](http://pubmed.gov/8252948)*Does not report hemogobin change or transfusions*
9. Tarpey J, Lawler PG. Iatrogenic anemia? A survey of venesection in patients in the intensive therapy unit. Anesthesia. 1990 May;45(5):396-8. PMID: [2356936](http://pubmed.gov/2356936).*No intervention*
10. Smoller BR, Kruskall MS. Phlebotomy for diagnostic laboratory tests in adults. Pattern of use and effect on transfusion requirements. N Engl J Med. 1986 May 8. PMID: [3702919](http://pubmed.gov/3702919).*Measure of variation not reported*

-------------------------------
[Cite and use this content](https://github.com/openMetaAnalysis/openMetaAnalysis.github.io/blob/master/reusing.MD)  - [Edit this page](../../edit/master/README.md) - [History](../../commits/master/README.md)  - 
[Issues and comments](../../issues?q=is%3Aboth+is%3Aissue)
