files/study-details/pico-table.md, before:

# PICO Table
([switch to Risk of Bias table](risk-of-bias.md))

Study                                                           |Patients/population/problem|Intervention|Comparison|Outcome|
----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|------------|----------|-------|
|Perruzi<br>1993<br>PMID [8472567](http://pubmed.gov/8472567)   |Adults in intensive care with an arterial catheter | VAMP | Usual care | Transfusion while in intensive care|
|MacIsaac<br>2003<br>PMID [14719427](http://pubmed.gov/14719427)|Adults in intensive care with an arterial catheter | VAMP | Usual care |Transfusion while in intensive care|
| Harber<br2006><br>PMID [16913337](http://pubmed.gov/16913337) |Adults in intensive care with an arterial catheter | VAMP + small collection tubes|Usual care|Transfusion while in intensive care|
| Mukhopadhyay<br>2010<br>PMID [20105285](http://pubmed.gov/20105285) |Adults in intensive care with an arterial catheter | VAMP |Usual care|Transfusion while in intensive care|
| Rezende<br>2010<br>PMID [25303693](http://pubmed.gov/25303693)|Adults in intensive care with an arterial catheter and mechanic ventilation > 24 hours| VAMP |Usual care|Transfusion while in intensive care|
| Riessen<br>2015<br>PMID [24635773](http://pubmed.gov/24635773) |Adults in intensive care with an arterial catheter and mechanic ventilation > 72 hours| VAMP + small collection tubes + policy changes|Usual care|Transfusion while in intensive care|

Commit message:

Noted studies usomg historical controls, added 2

files/study-details/pico-table.md, after:

# PICO Table
([switch to Risk of Bias table](risk-of-bias.md))

Except where the controls are noted to be historical, all studies are randomized trials with concurrent controls.

Study                                                           |Patients/population/problem|Intervention|Comparison|Outcome|
----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|------------|----------|-------|
| Perruzi<br>1993<br>PMID [8472567](http://pubmed.gov/8472567)   |Adults in intensive care with an arterial catheter | VAMP | Usual care | Transfusion while in intensive care|
| Thorpe<br>2000<br>PMID [10594430](http://pubmed.gov/10594430)   |Adults in intensive care with an arterial catheter and expected length of critical care to be more than 7 days | VAMP | Usual care | Transfusion while in intensive care\*|
| MacIsaac<br>2003<br>PMID [14719427](http://pubmed.gov/14719427)|Adults in intensive care with an arterial catheter | VAMP | Usual care |Transfusion while in intensive care|
| Harber<br>2006><br>PMID [16913337](http://pubmed.gov/16913337) |Adults in intensive care with an arterial catheter | VAMP + small collection tubes|Usual care|Transfusion while in intensive care|
| Mukhopadhyay<br>2010<br>PMID [20105285](http://pubmed.gov/20105285) |Adults in intensive care with an arterial catheter | VAMP |Usual care<br>(historical controls)|Transfusion while in intensive care|
| Rezende<br>2010<br>PMID [25303693](http://pubmed.gov/25303693)|Adults in intensive care with an arterial catheter and mechanic ventilation > 24 hours| VAMP |Usual care|Transfusion while in intensive care|
| Riessen<br>2015<br>PMID [24635773](http://pubmed.gov/24635773) |Adults in intensive care with an arterial catheter and mechanic ventilation > 72 hours| VAMP + small collection tubes + policy changes|Usual care<br>(historical controls)<br>(historical controls)|Transfusion while in intensive care|
| Dolman<br>2015<br>PMID [26164619](http://pubmed.gov/26164619)   |Adults in surgical intensive care for at least two days | Small collection tubes | Usual care<br>(historical controls) | Transfusion while in intensive care\*|

Notes:<br>
\* Event counts and risk ratios were estimated using the methods of Chinn (PMID [11113947](http://pubmed.gov/11113947)) and da Costa (PMID [23045205](http://pubmed.gov/23045205)) based on mean values in publications.
